src/content/docs/getting-started.mdx, before:

---
title: Getting started with Eclair
---

import CodeBlock from "../../components/CodeBlock.tsx";

Welcome to Eclair!

In this guide, we will explain how to install the Eclair compiler so you
can start using eclair in your projects.

Let's begin!

## Pre-requisites

First, the following list are the minimal requirements and tools to start using
Eclair:

- Operating system: Linux or OSX
- [git](#git)
- [LLVM (version 14 recommended)](#llvm-toolchain)

The steps below will assume Ubuntu Linux when Linux is mentioned, but with some
slight modifications the commands can also be ran on other Linux distributions.

Depending on how you want to use Eclair (via
[docker](#using-eclair-from-within-docker) or when you [build Eclair from
source](#building-from-source)), you may need to install some additional
tools.

### Git

Eclair makes use of [git](https://git-scm.com/) for version control.
The steps below show how to install git:

Linux:

<CodeBlock
  language="bash"
  code={`
$ sudo apt install git
`}
/>

OSX:

<CodeBlock
  language="bash"
  code={`
$ brew install git
`}
/>

### LLVM toolchain

The Eclair compiler uses [LLVM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LLVM) for
code-generation. LLVM **14** is the latest supported / recommended version.
Install it via your package manager of choice, or build it from source. This
can be done with entering the following commands in your terminal:

Linux:

<CodeBlock
  language="bash"
  code={`
# If these packages are not available on your system,
# try installing using this link: https://apt.llvm.org/.
$ sudo apt install llvm-14
$ sudo apt install lld-14
# Optional, if you want to use clang instead of llc
# to compile the LLVM IR
$ sudo apt install clang-14
`}
/>

OSX:

<CodeBlock
  language="bash"
  code={`
$ brew install llvm@14
`}
/>

After LLVM finishes installing, make sure the following commands are in your
`$PATH` (these might have a version suffix):

- llvm-config
- llc
- opt
- clang (optional, but handy)

Finally, make sure that `libLLVM.so` (potentially with a suffix) is in a
directory listed in your `$LD_LIBRARY_PATH`. If you installed LLVM via a
package manager, this should automatically be the case.

## Using Eclair from within Docker

The easiest way to get up and running with a working Eclair compiler is via the
[Docker](https://www.docker.com/) image in the eclair repository. Before you
can build the image, make sure `docker` is installed on your system.
Once `docker` is installed and available on your `$PATH`, you can build the
[Eclair Docker image](https://github.com/luc-tielen/eclair-lang/blob/main/Dockerfile)
by running the following commands in your terminal:

<CodeBlock
  language="bash"
  code={`
$ git clone git@github.com:luc-tielen/eclair-lang.git
$ cd eclair-lang
$ docker build -f Dockerfile . -t eclair:latest
`}
/>

After the Docker image finishes building, you can use Eclair from within Docker
by making use of a docker volume. For example, the following command assumes
a `hello.eclair` file is located in the current directory, uses a volume to
mount the current working directory inside the Docker image, and compiles the
program to a file containing LLVM IR in textual format:

<CodeBlock
  language="bash"
  code={`$ docker run --rm eclair:latest -v $(pwd):/code eclair compile hello.eclair > hello.ll`}
/>

The generated `hello.ll` file will be saved on your own machine. The file can
then be further compiled with LLVM using `llc`, `clang`, ... like any other
LLVM code.

## Building from source

Building from source is more difficult than using Eclair from the docker image
(mostly because you will need more tooling installed on your system), but it allows
you to directly use Eclair on your system.

### Additional pre-requisites

Besides the [minimal pre-requisites](#pre-requisites) mentioned previously,
Eclair requires both a Haskell and Soufflé compiler to be installed
on your system. If you notice that the installation instructions below are
incomplete or outdated, please open a [Github
issue](https://github.com/luc-tielen/eclair-website/issues).

#### Soufflé

Part of the Eclair compiler is written in [Soufflé
Datalog](https://souffle-lang.github.io), so the Soufflé compiler (version
**2.3**) needs to be available on your system. You can find binaries for your
operating system on the [release page for
Soufflé](https://github.com/souffle-lang/souffle/releases/tag/2.3), or install
it via your package manager.

#### GHC

The other part of the Eclair compiler is written in Haskell, so we will need a Haskell
compiler for compiling the source code. `GHC 9.4` is the current recommended
Haskell compiler. The easiest way to install GHC is with
[ghcup](https://www.haskell.org/ghcup/). Run the following commands in a
terminal to install the Haskell toolchain:

<CodeBlock
  language="bash"
  code={`
$ curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://get-ghcup.haskell.org | sh
$ ghcup tui
# In the UI, select GHC 9.4 and recommended Cabal version
# Important: both install + set them!
`}
/>

### Building the compiler

Now that all pre-requisites are installed, you can build the compiler itself.
Run the following commands to clone the Eclair repository from Github and build
the code.

<CodeBlock
  language="bash"
  code={`
$ git clone git@github.com:luc-tielen/eclair-lang.git
$ cd eclair-lang
$ cabal build
$ cabal list-bin eclair-lang
`}
/>

Wait for the code to finish compiling. Afterwards, add the path returned by
`cabal list-bin` to the `$PATH`.

## Compiling code

how to use compiler,
simple code snippet

## Integrating with other languages

- language selection: rust, haskell, js/ts, (C)

Commit message:

Finish v1 of getting started page

src/content/docs/getting-started.mdx, after:

---
title: Getting started with Eclair
---

import CodeBlock from "../../components/CodeBlock.tsx";

Welcome to Eclair!

In this guide, we will explain how to install the Eclair compiler so you
can start using eclair in your projects.

Let's begin!

## Pre-requisites

First, the following list are the minimal requirements and tools to start using
Eclair:

- Operating system: Linux or OSX
- [git](#git)
- [LLVM (version 14 recommended)](#llvm-toolchain)

The steps below will assume Ubuntu Linux when Linux is mentioned, but with some
slight modifications the commands can also be ran on other Linux distributions.

Depending on how you want to use Eclair (via
[docker](#using-eclair-from-within-docker) or when you [build Eclair from
source](#building-from-source)), you may need to install some additional
tools.

### Git

Eclair makes use of [git](https://git-scm.com/) for version control.
The steps below show how to install git:

Linux:

<CodeBlock
  language="bash"
  code={`
$ sudo apt install git
`}
/>

OSX:

<CodeBlock
  language="bash"
  code={`
$ brew install git
`}
/>

### LLVM toolchain

The Eclair compiler uses [LLVM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LLVM) for
code-generation. LLVM **14** is the latest supported / recommended version.
Install it via your package manager of choice, or build it from source. This
can be done with entering the following commands in your terminal:

Linux:

<CodeBlock
  language="bash"
  code={`
# If these packages are not available on your system,
# try installing using this link: https://apt.llvm.org/.
$ sudo apt install llvm-14
$ sudo apt install lld-14
# Optional, if you want to use clang instead of llc
# to compile the LLVM IR
$ sudo apt install clang-14
`}
/>

OSX:

<CodeBlock
  language="bash"
  code={`
$ brew install llvm@14
`}
/>

After LLVM finishes installing, make sure the following commands are in your
`$PATH` (these might have a version suffix):

- llvm-config
- llc
- opt
- clang (optional, but handy)

Finally, make sure that `libLLVM.so` (potentially with a suffix) is in a
directory listed in your `$LD_LIBRARY_PATH`. If you installed LLVM via a
package manager, this should automatically be the case.

## Using Eclair from within Docker

The easiest way to get up and running with a working Eclair compiler is via the
[Docker](https://www.docker.com/) image in the eclair repository. Before you
can build the image, make sure `docker` is installed on your system.
Once `docker` is installed and available on your `$PATH`, you can build the
[Eclair Docker image](https://github.com/luc-tielen/eclair-lang/blob/main/Dockerfile)
by running the following commands in your terminal:

<CodeBlock
  language="bash"
  code={`
$ git clone git@github.com:luc-tielen/eclair-lang.git
$ cd eclair-lang
$ docker build -f Dockerfile . -t eclair:latest
`}
/>

After the Docker image finishes building, you can use Eclair from within Docker
by making use of a docker volume. For example, the following command assumes
a `hello.eclair` file is located in the current directory, uses a volume to
mount the current working directory inside the Docker image, and compiles the
program to a file containing LLVM IR in textual format:

<CodeBlock
  language="bash"
  code={`$ docker run --rm eclair:latest -v $(pwd):/code eclair compile hello.eclair > hello.ll`}
/>

The generated `hello.ll` file will be saved on your own machine. The file can
then be further compiled with LLVM using `llc`, `clang`, ... like any other
LLVM code.

## Building from source

Building from source is more difficult than using Eclair from the docker image
(mostly because you will need more tooling installed on your system), but it allows
you to directly use Eclair on your system.

### Additional pre-requisites

Besides the [minimal pre-requisites](#pre-requisites) mentioned previously,
Eclair requires both a Haskell and Soufflé compiler to be installed
on your system. If you notice that the installation instructions below are
incomplete or outdated, please open a [Github
issue](https://github.com/luc-tielen/eclair-website/issues).

#### Soufflé

Part of the Eclair compiler is written in [Soufflé
Datalog](https://souffle-lang.github.io), so the Soufflé compiler (version
**2.3**) needs to be available on your system. You can find binaries for your
operating system on the [release page for
Soufflé](https://github.com/souffle-lang/souffle/releases/tag/2.3), or install
it via your package manager.

#### GHC

The other part of the Eclair compiler is written in Haskell, so we will need a Haskell
compiler for compiling the source code. `GHC 9.4` is the current recommended
Haskell compiler. The easiest way to install GHC is with
[ghcup](https://www.haskell.org/ghcup/). Run the following commands in a
terminal to install the Haskell toolchain:

<CodeBlock
  language="bash"
  code={`
$ curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://get-ghcup.haskell.org | sh
$ ghcup tui
# In the UI, select GHC 9.4 and recommended Cabal version
# Important: both install + set them!
`}
/>

### Building the compiler

Now that all pre-requisites are installed, you can build the compiler itself.
Run the following commands to clone the Eclair repository from Github and build
the code.

<CodeBlock
  language="bash"
  code={`
$ git clone git@github.com:luc-tielen/eclair-lang.git
$ cd eclair-lang
$ cabal build
$ cabal list-bin eclair-lang
`}
/>

And wait for the code to finish compiling. If the compilation succeeds, it
should print out the path to the compiler.

### Configuring your environment

The final step is to update your environment variables (located in `.bashrc`,
`.zshrc`, ...) in so the eclair compiler can be found. Do this by applying the
following changes:

1. Add the path returned by `cabal list-bin` to your `$PATH` variable
2. Add the following line to your config:
   `export DATALOG_DIR=ECLAIR_REPO_DIR/cbits`.
   ("ECLAIR_REPO_DIR" should be replaced with the path where you cloned the
   Eclair compiler).

### Check your installation

If you followed all steps, you should now have a working Eclair compiler build
from source! You can check this by running the following command in your terminal:

<CodeBlock language="bash" code={`$ eclair --help`} />

This should print out the help page for the compiler.

## Next steps

After the compiler is installed or build from source, you can learn how to
[compile Eclair code](/docs/compiling-code).
